This video and the next one is about
creating and using custom exceptions.
Java comes packaged with a lot
of exceptions, so when would you
want or need to write your own?
Remember that you can instantiate
a new instance of one of the
supplied exceptions and customize
it using one of the constructors
listed in the following
table, you can see on screen.
So, these constructors are available
to all exception classes i.e
Throwable, Error, Exception, etc.
Alright, so looking at this table, the
first constructor has no parameters
that constructs a new throwable
with null as its detail message.
Next, we've got a parameter
there, of a string, and that
constructs a new throwable with
the specified detail message.
The next one has two parameters,
string and a throwable,
and that constructs a new
throwable with a specified
detail message and the cause.
The next one, we've got four
parameters there, and basically,
we've got the message, the cause,
where the suppression is enabled or
disabled, and whether writeable
stack trace is enabled or disabled.
And we can also just pass one
parameter of type throwable and
that constructs a new throwable
with the specified cause and a
detailed message, which depends
on whether cause is null or not.
So, if it is null then obviously,
the detail message will be null,
otherwise, it will be whenever
is in the toString from the
throwable parameter that's passed.
And that's typically containing the
class and detailed message, of course.
Alright, so there are pros and
cons to creating Custom Exceptions.
Let's look at some reasons
to use custom exceptions.
Firstly, you can be more specific
with them allowing calling
code to use the exception type
to determine the response.
A second reason is if you want
to differentiate your exceptions
from either library exceptions
or Java platform exceptions.
Third reason to use custom exceptions
is, if you find your code segment
throwing multiple exceptions, and
differentiating them with custom
exceptions can help remove the
burden of exact identification of
the problem from the calling code.
And the last reason to use a custom
exception would be, if you want
to extend the exception classes
for your application, adding
additional state, or behavior to
the exception handling process.
And reasons not to use custom
exceptions, firstly, programmers
are already familiar with library
exceptions and know what are
checked and unchecked for example.
The second reason to not use custom
exceptions, if you're extending them
with additional state of behavior,
do you really need a custom one?
That's a question to ask yourself.
The java platform does provide
many specific types of exceptions.
Earlier in this section, I reviewed a
slide like this one with the structure
of the Error and Exception Hierarchy.
I'm showing it again here
because it's relevant when you're
creating custom exception classes.
So, any of the classes showing
here can be used to extend your
own custom exception class.
Anything descending from
throwable is called an exception.
Although exceptions fall into
two buckets, the Error or
the formal class exception.
We also know that a RuntimeException
and an Error are unchecked exceptions,
meaning the compiler doesn't enforce
the catch or specify requirement.
I'll refer to Section 11 of my 1Z0-819,
Part 1 course, here on udemy if
you need a refresher on that.
I'm including a small portion of
another slide from that course, the
1Z0-819, Part 1 course, specifically,
Section 11, which is relevant
to our discussion in this video.
So, this following table explains
what types of errors are checked
and unchecked exceptions.
So, looking at the class type,
throwable or any custom exception
which extends throwable is a checked
exception, and it must satisfy
The Catch or Specify Requirement.
Next error or any custom exception
which extends error is an unchecked
exception and doesn't need to satisfy
The Catch or Specify Requirement.
Thirdly, RuntimeException - Any
exception subclassed directly or
indirectly from RuntimeException
and these are also called
unsurprisingly runtime exceptions
well they are an unchecked exception,
and no, they don't need to satisfy
The Catch or Specify Requirement.
And fourth exception - Any
exception not subclassed from
RuntimeException or its subclasses,
or that is a checked exception,
and yes, it must satisfy The
Catch or Specify Requirement.
A checked exception is a special
designation for a group of exceptions
that the compiler enforces compliance
of ‘The catch or Specify’ requirement.
Now, there's some common RuntimeExceptions
are ArithmeticException
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException,
ClassCastException, IndexOutOfBoundException,
and NullPointerException.
These are unchecked and the compiler
does not enforce the compliance of
The Catch or Specify requirement.
Remember that any exception
left unhandled will terminate
execution of your program.
So, why do we care about checked
and unchecked exceptions when
creating custom exceptions?
Well, the reason is you first, need
to determine if your custom exception
should be checked or unchecked.
Do you need the exception to be
part of a method's public signature?
If your answer is yes, and you
expect the client to be aware that
this exception could occur, and
you expect the client to handle
it, then you design a checked
exception in that scenario.
Is the exception catastrophic
and the client cannot be
expected to handle it?
Well, this would qualify as an
error and would not be checked.
Is the exception something that
should not occur and would be
rare, because of coding mistakes?
Then that would be an
unchecked RuntimeException.
Alright, so let's
finish the video here.
And in the next one, let's swing
back to intellij and start creating
some custom checked exceptions.
See you in the next video!